To make it tangible, we are going to consider
the example of my mobile phone.
First thing I am going to do is to attach
a right handed coordinate frame to it and
I am going to have the z-axis out of the face
of the screen.
The y-axis is vertically upwards on the phone
and the x-axis is horizontal from left to
right.
I am going to call this frame B and that stands
for the body frame or the body-fixed frame.
This is a very common notation in aerospace
and also in robotics.
Now we are going to place one accelerometer
aligned with each of the axes that we have
attached to the phone.
So, one accelerometer would be in XB direction
and one in the YB direction and one in the
ZB direction.
Modern mobile phones, are packed full of inertial
sensors.
They contained three accelerometers, three
gyros and three magnetometers.
Like everything else that we've talked about
in this lecture series, we are going to attach
a coordinate frame to the phone.
You have to look reasonably deeply into the
documentation to find the coordinate frame
conventions for the phone, but for an iPhone
like this, the convention is the x-axis is
to the right and the y-axis is to the top
of the phone and the z-axis is out of the
screen.
So, I am going to fix one of my standard coordinate
frames to the phone, so we understand what's
what.
There are many apps that you can get for your
phone, that report the acceleration measurement
recorded by the sensors built into the phone
itself.
Unfortunately, many of these apps introduce
a negative sign.
That means that if the phone is sitting flat
on the table, it reports a value of minus
1G in the negative z or down with the direction
but as we discussed in the previous section,
acceleration of a device sitting flat on a
table should be 1G in the positive upward
x direction.
So, here we have the plumb bob, which is hanging
down under the force of gravity, so it is
aligned parallel to the gravitational acceleration
with the same gravitational acceleration is
parallel to the z-axis.
If I rotate the phone like this, so now, the
gravitational acceleration is parallel to
the y-axis and now I can rotate the phone,
so the gravitational acceleration is parallel
to the x-axis.
Let us consider now the problem of determining
the orientation of the phone with respect
to a world coordinate frame.
The world coordinate frame is shown here in
blue and its origin shows that the z-axis
is upwards and parallel to the gravity vector.
Frame B, the body frame is attached rigidly
to the phone.
Now I can write an expression for the orientation
of the phone with respect to the world coordinate
frame and I will do that in terms of yaw,
pitch and roll angles which are successive
rotations about the z-axis, the y-axis and
then the x-axis.
This is the gravitational acceleration in
the world frame because the world z-axis is
parallel to the gravitational acceleration
vector.
We note here that G is positive.
Nós estamos falando sobre aceleração no sistema
de coordenadas universal é G no sentido ascendente.
É extremamente simples rotacionar esta aceleração
gravitacional respeitando o sistema de coordenadas
dentro do escopo do corpo.
É isto que os sensores no seu celular medem
Eles estão mensurando a gravidade em relação ao
eixo B. É extremamente importante notar que
Isto assume que o telefone não está acelerando.
A única aceleração aplicada ao corpo é
aquela devido à gravidade.
Agora, eu posso expandir o lado direito
e substituir o lado esquerdo
com a gravidade medida pelos sensores no telefone
Eu tenho uma equação vetorial bem simples
Se tomarmos a primeira linha nessa equação vetorial.
Eu posso reorganizar ela para chegar a uma solução
para o ângulo de rotação theta.
Se tomarmos o quociente das duas últimas fileiras
na equação vetorial, eu obtenho esta expressão
para o ângulo de rotação do telefone.
Duas equações bem simples baseadas nas medidas
de aceleração me dão os ângulos de rotação e inclinação
do telefone em relação ao sistema de coordenadas universal
Então, você nota nesta equação que o ângulo de guinada
nao aparece.
Uma maneira simples de pensar sobre o porquê este é o
caso, é que o vetor de gravidade possui
três elementos, mas o comprimento é fixo
portanto, nós podemos defini-lo por apenas dois pedaços de informação.
O terceiro elemnto do vetor gravidade é redundante.
Neste caso, os dois pedaços de informação que
nós precisamos são os ângulos de rotação e
inclinação.
Nós não precisamos do ângulo de guinada.
Para medir o ângulo de guinada, nós precisamos usar
um tipo diferente de sensor, e este sensor é
na verdade um compasso, e este é o tópico
da nossa próxima sessão.
Uma consideração importante quando utilizamos
três acelerômetros é que eles medem apenas
duas variáveis independentes.
O comprimento do vetor é fixo, portanto,
nós podemos descrever este vetor apenas em termos
de dois ângulos.
Nós podemos observar isto claramente quando
o telefone é configurado da seguinte maneira
Aceleração zero nas direções Z e X.
Toda a aceleração é na direção do Y
Então, as medidas do acelerômetro são exatamente
as mesmas com o celular orientado desta maneira,
ou desta,
ou desta.
Não faz diferença alguma.
Atualmente, os acelerômetros possuem um custo baixo
mas uma performance extremamente alta.
Parte do motivo para isto é que eles são
fabricados em grandes quantidades.
Eles são utilizados para acionar airbags nos carros.
Eles são utilizados em câmeras digitais para saber
se a orientação é no modo de paisagem
ou retrato.
Eles são utilizados no seu celular para diversos
tipos de aplicações diferentes e são usados
para estabilização de uma gama incontável de veículos
desde brinquedos baratos como este até
sistemas muito mais sofisticados.